Updated NFS documentation (#65)
owncloud/docs-ocis: modules/ROOT/pages/deployment/nfs.adoc

= Network File System (NFS) Deployment Recommendations
:toc: right
:toclevels: 2

:ea-ietf-url: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8276
:autofs-url: https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Autofs
:lockd-url: https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E19455-01/806-0916/rfsrefer-9/index.html
:mount-man-page-url: http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/mount.8.html
:netplan-docs-url: https://netplan.io/reference
:networkmanager-url: https://help.ubuntu.com/community/NetworkManager
:networkworld-mtu-size-issues-url: https://www.networkworld.com/article/2224654/mtu-size-issues.html
:nfs-man-page-url: https://linux.die.net/man/5/nfs
:nfs-read-write-delegations-url: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7530#section-1.4.6
:nfs-strong-security-architecture-url: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7530#section-3 
:nmcli-url: https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/focal/man1/nmcli.1.html
:nmtui-url: https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/focal/man1/nmtui.1.html
:rpc-statd-url: https://linux.die.net/man/8/rpc.statd

> :man-nfs-ubuntu-url: http://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/focal/man5/nfs.5.html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* *Improved Security:* It {nfs-strong-security-architecture-url}[mandates a strong security architecture]. It does not require {rpc-statd-url}[rpc.statd] or {lockd-url}[lockd]. As a result, it only uses port 2049.
* *Improved Reliability:* It uses TCP by default.
* *Improved Performance:* It uses multi-component messages, which reduce network traffic. It is capable of using a 32KB page size, compared to the default, 1024 bytes.
* Use of {nfs-read-write-delegations-url}[Read/Write Delegations].

[caption=]
.NFSv4 Key Value Overview
[width="100%",cols="30%,70%",options="header",]
|===

| NFSv4
| Explanation

| Exports
| All exports can be mounted together in a directory tree structure as part of a pseudo-filesystem

| Protocol
| A single protocol with the addition of OPEN and CLOSE for security auditing

| Locking
| Lease-based locking in the same protocol

| Security
| Kerberos and ACL-based

| Communication
| Multiple operations per RPC (improves performance)

| I18N
| UTF-8

| Scalable parallel access to files distributed between multiple servers
| pNFS (with NFSv4.1)

| Extended Attributes
| Introduced by {ea-ietf-url}[IETF, December 2017]
|===

== NFS Mount Options

> See the {nfs-man-page-url}[man pages] for a detailed description of the NFS mount options. The following options are default for NFS except if explicitly set differently when mounting: `rw`, `suid`, `dev`, `exec`, `auto`, `nouser`, and `async`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the {nfs-man-page-url}[Linux man pages] for a detailed description of the NFS mount options. The following options are default for NFS except if explicitly set differently when mounting: `rw`, `suid`, `dev`, `exec`, `auto`, `nouser`, and `async`.
```

> See the {man-nfs-ubuntu-url}[Ubuntu 20.04 man pages] for a detailed description of the NFS mount options. The following options are default for NFS except if explicitly set differently when mounting: `rw`, `suid`, `dev`, `exec`, `auto`, `nouser`, and `async`.

Reviewer: Is there a reason to point to the Ubuntu man pages instead of the man page project?
https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man5/nfs.5.html

Author: no, link and text can be changed

> See the {man-nfs-ubuntu-url}[Ubuntu 20.04 man pages] for a detailed description of the NFS mount options. The following options are default for NFS except if explicitly set differently when mounting: `rw`, `suid`, `dev`, `exec`, `auto`, `nouser`, and `async`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the {nfs-man-page-url}[man pages] for a detailed description of the NFS mount options. The following options are default for NFS except if explicitly set differently when mounting: `rw`, `suid`, `dev`, `exec`, `auto`, `nouser`, and `async`.
```

=== Mount Options to Consider

==== _netdev

> Use this option to ensure that the network is enabled, before NFS attempts to mount these filesystems. This setting is essential when other services depend on the availability of the NFS storage during the start process. A service may error or not start correctly, if the mount is not ready before attempting to access its data files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this option to ensure that the network is enabled before NFS attempts to mount these filesystems. This setting is essential when other services depend on the availability of the NFS storage during the start process. A service may fail or not start correctly if the mount is not ready before attempting to access its data files.
```

TIP: You can also use {autofs-url}[autofs], to ensure that mounts are always available before attempting to access them.

==== nofail

Using `nofail` allows the boot sequence to continue even if the drive fails to mount. This can happen if the NFS server accessed is down. The boot process will continue after the mount reaches timeout. The default device timeout is 90 seconds. If the option is not set, the boot process will wait until the NFS server is available but can be manually set using the option `x-systemd.mount-timeout=<value in seconds>`.

==== bg

> ownCloud recommends using this option. Determines how the mount command behaves if an attempt to mount an export fails. If the bg option is specified, a timeout or failure triggers the mount command to fork a child, which will continue to attempt mounting the export. The parent immediately returns with a zero exit code. This is known as a "background" mount. This option is useful for continuous operation without manual intervention if the network connectivity is temporarily down or the storage backend must be rebooted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ownCloud recommends using this option. Determines how the mount command behaves if an attempt to mount an export fails. If the bg option is specified, a timeout or failure triggers the mount command to fork a child, which will continue to attempt mounting the export. The parent immediately returns with a zero exit code. This is known as a "background" mount. This option is useful for continuous operation without manual intervention if the network connectivity is temporarily down or the storage back end must be rebooted.
```

==== hard

Default value is _hard_. For business-critical NFS exports, ownCloud recommends using _hard_ mounts. ownCloud strongly discourages the use of _soft_ mounts.

==== retrans

Default value is 3. This option can be tuned when using option _soft_.

==== timeo

Default value is 600 (60 seconds). This option can be tuned when using option _soft_.

==== sync/async

With the default value of _async_, the NFS client may delay sending application writes to the NFS server. In other words, under normal circumstances, data written by an application may not immediately appear on the server that hosts the file. The **sync** mount option provides greater data cache coherence among clients, but at a **significant performance cost**. You may consider further tuning when using clustered server environments.

==== tcp

> ownCloud recommends using this option. Force using TCP as transport protocol. Alternatively you can use _proto=tcp_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ownCloud recommends using this option forcing the use of TCP as transport protocol. Alternatively you can use _proto=tcp_.
```

==== Tune the Read and Write Block Sizes

> The allowed block sizes are the packet chunk sizes that NFS uses when reading and writing data. The smaller the size, the greater the number of packets need to be sent to send or receive a file. Conversely, the larger the size, the fewer the number of packets need to be sent to send or receive a file. With NFS Version 3 and 4, you can set the `rsize` and `wsize` values as high as 65536, when the network transport is TCP. The default value is 32768 and must be a multiple of 4096.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The allowed block sizes are the packet chunk sizes that NFS uses when reading and writing data. The smaller the size, the greater the number of packets needed to transfer a file. Conversely, the larger the size, the fewer the number of packets that need to be sent to transfer a file. With NFS Version 3 and 4, you can set the `rsize` and `wsize` values as high as 65536 if the network transport protocol is TCP. The default value is 32768 and must be a multiple of 4096.
```

NOTE: Read and write size must be identical on the NFS server and client.

> You can find the set values by working with the output of the `mount` command on a standard server, as in the example below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find the configured values in the output of the `mount` command on a standard server, as in the example below.
```

[source,console]
----
root@server:~# mount | egrep -o rsize=[0-9]*
----

[source,plaintext]
----
rsize=65536
----

[source,console]
----
root@server:~# mount | egrep -o wsize=[0-9]*
----

[source,plaintext]
----
wsize=65536
----

The information can also be retrieved using the command set of your dedicated storage backend.
Once you've determined the best sizes, set them permanently by passing the (`rsize` and `wsize`) options when mounting the share or in the share's mount configuration.

.Specifying the read and write block sizes when calling mount
[source,bash]
----
mount 192.168.0.104:/data /mnt -o rsize=65536,wsize=65536
----

.Example for a set of NFS mount options:
[source,plaintext]
----
bg,nfsvers=4,wsize=65536,rsize=65536,tcp,_netdev
----

== Ethernet Configuration Options
 
=== MTU (Maximum Transmission Unit) Size

The MTU size dictates the maximum amount of data that can be transferred in one Ethernet frame.

> If the MTU size is too small, then regardless of the read and write block sizes, the data must still be fragmented across multiple frames.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the MTU size is too small, the data must still be fragmented across multiple frames regardless of the read and write block sizes.
```

Keep in mind that MTU = payload (`packetsize`) + 28.

> ==== Get the Current Set MTU Size

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Get the Current MTU Size
```

[source,bash]
----
netstat -i
----

[source,plaintext]
----
Kernel Interface table
Iface      MTU    RX-OK RX-ERR RX-DRP RX-OVR    TX-OK TX-ERR TX-DRP TX-OVR Flg
lo       65536   363183      0      0 0        363183      0      0      0 LRU
eth0      1500  3138292      0      0 0       2049155      0      0      0 BMR
----

.Retrieve interface MTU size with ifconfig
[source,bash]
----
ifconfig| grep -i MTU
----

[source,plaintext]
----
lo: flags=73<UP,LOOPBACK,RUNNING>  mtu 65536
eth0: flags=4163<UP,BROADCAST,RUNNING,MULTICAST>  mtu 1500
----

.Retrieve interface MTU size with ip
[source,bash]
----
ip addr | grep mtu
----

[source,plaintext]
----
1: lo: <LOOPBACK,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 65536 qdisc noqueue state UNKNOWN group default qlen 1000
2: eth0: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc mq state UP group default qlen 1000
----

.Retrieve interface MTU size with cat
[source,bash]
----
cat /sys/class/net/<interface>/mtu
----

==== Check for MTU Fragmentation

To check if a particular packet size will be fragmented on the way to the target, run the following command:

[source,bash]
----
ping <your-storage-backend> -c 3 -M do -s <packetsize>
----

==== Get the Optimal MTU Size

> To get the optimal MTU size, run following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get the optimal MTU size, run the following command:
```
